AI Capstone
Homework 3: A Robot Navigation Framework

Announce: 2026/4/13, Due date: 2026/4/27
Introduction
In this assignment, you will use a semantic map of apartment_0 to navigate a
robot to a specified destination (e.g., locating a target object). You will
implement point-to-point navigation using the RRT algorithm.
(Only the first floor of apartment_0 will be used.)
There are mainly three parts:
Part 1. 2D semantic map construction
Use the provided semantic point cloud to get a 2D semantic map for
navigation.
Part 2. RRT algorithm implementation
We use the RRT algorithm to find a navigable path from starting point A
to goal point B (a specific item).
Part 3. Robot navigation
An agent can navigate automatically by following the path calculated by
RRT to find specific items.

Implementation
You can either complete the TODOs in the provided template code or
implement your own version as long as you follow the below guides.
Example Final Result (Target object: cooktop)

Part 1: 2D semantic map construction
The following describes the steps for generating a 2D semantic map.
1. We provide a 3D semantic map of the first floor of apartment_0 under

hw3/semantic_3d_pointcloud. Remove ceiling and floor points of the
point cloud and do any extra processing you need.
2. Save coordinates and colors of the points (the color should be the same as
color map for 101 categories)
3. Use any libraries (e.g. matplotlib) to plot a scatter graph (x-coordinate,
z-coordinate in the point clouds) with the points you saved

Notes for Step 3:
● The scale relationship between coordinates in point.npy and
apartment_0 is apartment_0 = points array * 10000. / 255.
● There are two versions of the color array. The value of RGB in
color01.npy is in the range [0, 1] while color0255.npy is in the range
[0, 255]. If you have problems using color01.npy to find labels because
of floating-point errors, you can use color0255.npy.
Note: You need to find the relationship between the map (pixel) coordinate and
the Habitat coordinates. It’s necessary for Part 3. You can add extra points to
calculate the scale or create different maps to help you.
Example map:

[After removing ceiling]

[After Removing ceiling and floor]

Part 2: RRT Algorithm
You will implement the RRT algorithm, which calculates a navigable path from
the 2D map we created from part 1. For more details on the algorithm, please
check details on this link, RRT [1] , or the slide in the class.

You need to search for these target categories, including rack, cushion, sofa,
stair, and cooktop. You can check the color map for 101 categories for the
corresponding colors.
Input:
1. A target category you want to search
Just input a string (e.g:, rack)
2. Choose a starting point to navigate by clicking on the map (on the
visualized GUI)
Output:
1. A map with a path from a starting point to a target point. The
target point is a point in front of the target item. You can use any
method to decide the location of the point.
2. Waypoints on this route
The xy-coordinate calculated by RRT is in the pixel coordinate. To
navigate in Habitat, you need to convert them into the coordinate of the
first floor apartment_0.
Example of a RRT output:

Part 3: Robot Navigation
1. Based on the path you get in Part 2, let the agent move using these three
commands: "move_forward", “turn_left”, and “turn_right”.
● You can modify it from hw0/load.py to do navigation or use
hw3/navigator.py

● We can define the amount of how much the agent should move and
turn for each step by changing the following config

2. Please highlight the target with a transparent mask while navigating so
that we can clearly visualize the target category.
● Ref: tutorial_adding_images
Examples of a transparent mask

Grading
Online Demo 30%
We will specify a target label among: rack, cushion, sofa, stair, and
cooktop and a starting point. You should show us the corresponding
navigation result on the first floor of apartment_0, including the ability
to select the starting point on the map, display the RRT results, and

visualize the robot moving along the planned path.
a.​ 10 points per object (We will randomly pick 2 out of the 5)
b.​ 10 points for question and answer.
Report 70%
Your report should include the following content (in English):
1. Implementation (50%)
a. Code
Detailed explanation of your implementation with code screenshots.
For example:
​ - How do you process the 3D pointcloud?
- How do you do the RRT algorithm?
b. Result and Discussion
- Show and discuss the results from the RRT algorithm with
different start points and targets.
- Discuss about the robot navigation results.
- Anything you want to discuss.
c. Reference
- Any reference you take
2. Questions (20%)
a. In the RRT algorithm, you can adjust the step size and bias (the
number balance between exploration and exploitation). Please explain
how the two numbers affect the RRT sampling result. (15%)
b. If you want to apply the indoor navigation pipeline in the real world,
what problems may you encounter? (5%)
Bonus 10%
Try to improve the RRT algorithm by comparing and discussing it with the
original one.
QA page
The following link is to the QA page for Homework 3. If you have any
questions, please post your questions to this Notion page. We will answer
them as soon as possible.

Link To Notion Page

Submission
Due date: 2026/4/27
Please directly compress your code files and report (.pdf) into a zip file with
this convention {STUDENT_ID}_hw3.zip and submit it to the New E3
System. ex : 123456789_hw3.zip
The file structure should look like:

{student_id}_hw3.zip
┣ README.md (Explain how to run your code)
┣ report.pdf
┣ src
┣ main.py
┗ (other python files, .py format, if you have)

●​ Wrong submission format leads to -10 points.
●​ Late submission leads to -20 points per day.
●​ Plagiarism is strictly prohibited, including assignments written on
GitHub. If we find any instances, it will result in a zero score without
any room for objection.
●​ Reports not written in English will receive a score of zero.

References
[1] RRT

